Space.
The final frontier.
For some 60 years now we've been skimming
the stars and sending robots and astronauts
up into orbit and beyond.
But we've always used rockets.
And they're rubbish!
Eye wateringly expensive, almost always wasted
after one shot, dangerous, unreliable, polluting,
and because it takes a lot of fuel to get
into space and more fuel to get that fuel
into space, really inefficient.
Surely, there must be a better way.
Well, actually, there are several.
Here's our top five ways of getting into space
they actually tried...
5.
Skylon
Skylon is far more than just a CGI dream.
It's actually pretty close to flying.
This vast, thunderbird esque plane is a rocket
jet hybrid.
It takes off like a normal plane, flies into
space, delivers a cargo of up to 11 tonnes
to the ISS or other stations, then flies home
to land, refuel and take off again.
The secret to Skylon is the sabre engine.
Most planes have big heavy engines which operate
at limited power to control their temperature.
Skylon doesn't.
An innovative cooling system in the nose freezes
air from 1000C down to -150C where it is burned
with an onboard hydrogen fuel, allowing the
engine to be lighter and run at far higher
loads, accelerating to 5.4 times the speed
of sound at 16 miles high.
Once there, it shuts off the now very thin
exterior air supply and uses onboard oxygen
to rocket the plane into orbit.
If it works, It'll be seriously cheap to mass
produce, cheap to run, very efficient (it'll
use less than a fifth of the fuel of a comparable
rocket), won't require much in the way of
infrastructure - because it can just use airports
- and should be very reliable.
And it's being built.
The engine precooler, by far the most difficult
part of the engineering project, works and
has been signed off by the ESA, freeing up
millions of pounds in European and British
funding.
Millions isn't nearly enough, though.
If they get the probably billions they need,
Skylon could be flying within just a few years,
offering cheap, regular,reliable flights for
tonnes of cargo and up to 30 passengers into
orbit.
4.
Lightcraft
To get into space you need thrust.
But what if you had a way of beaming thrust
from the ground rather than creating it from
fuel carried on board?
A much lighter and therefore cheaper and more
efficient ship.
That's what.
Lightcraft have a special mirror on their
underside which focusses laser light beamed
from the ground to a point in the air directly
beneath the craft.
Their air is heated to 50,000C, ten times
hotter than the surface of the sun.
The air explodes, and the shockwave pushes
the ship up.
All the way back in 2000, a group of private
and government bodies used a 10 kilowatt laser
to lift a 1.8 oz ship 233 feet off the ground.
It's estimated that with a 100 megawatt laser
and a 1.4m mirror, supply and satellite payloads
of up to 100kg could be sent rapidly and very
cheaply to the ISS and other platforms.
3.
Space Elevator
Most of the problem with getting things into
space is that it takes loads of fuel.
Partly because a rocket needs to be going
really fast to escape the Earth's gravitational
pull, partly because fuel is heavy and needs
even more fuel to lift it up.
So how about a system that actually gets you
into space very slowly, and picks up all its
fuel en route?
Enter the space elevator.
Which does exactly what it says on the tin.
A cable, up into an orbital platform, upon
which ships and satellites can be lifted and
sent off on their way using only the tiniest
amounts of fuel.
Either the cable can be electrified to provide
power, or it can be transmitted from the ground
via lasers, which overcomes several engineering
problems.
There are some problems though.
To work, the cable would have to stay in the
same position over Earth.
That means that the end platform has to be
above geostationary orbit- some 36,000 km
from Earth.
Then, to make sure the lift car doesn't bring
the whole system crashing down with it's weight,
the cable has to extend further - twice as
far - to act as a counterweight at the other
end.
That's over 70,000km of cable.
You could use a large counterweight closer
to the orbit, but it would have to be huge
- we're talking either capturing an asteroid,
building a VERY big space station, or collecting
the first cars that ascend the structure.
But the main problem is that cable.
At least 36,000km of it, which has to be strong
enough to take its own weight and the force
of the counterweight, car and cargo, and flexible
enough to withstand weather conditions en
route.
That's no mean feat.
In fact, until recently, there were NO materials
on Earth which fitted the bill.
Carbon nanotubes show promise, being extremely
light, strong and flexible - but as yet no
one can produce them in nearly long enough
strands to even test the theory.
The system has its champions though, Japan
holds regular space elevator competitions
and has pledged to be a leader in any scheme.
2.
Project Orion
To space on nuclear bombs!
Sounds like dodgy 1950s science fiction?
Well check this out.
The department of energy tried it.
It was called project Orion.
The idea was simple, a ship dropped a bomb
behind it, the bomb exploded, and the ship
rode the shockwave, potentially reaching speeds
that would put Saturn, and possibly even Neptune,
Pluto and beyond, within easy reach of astronauts.
The theory was sound, as you can see from
these early tests, which used conventional
explosives.
The real thing would have been vast, several
times the size of a Saturn V rocket for a
long trip and weighing up to 10,000 tonnes.
800 bombs weighing anything from hundreds
to thousands of tonnes would heft the craft
into orbit, but that created a problem.
A lot of bombs equals a lot of risks.
If you want to avoid killing a lot of people,
you have to make sure it's safe, and a long
way from humanity.
Having said that, each launch would be, relatively,
not much more polluting than single early
nuclear bomb tests.
The most incredible thing, though, is that
it could have been built.
Keen for more funding from the military, the
team behind Orion designed a missile armed,
bomb powered battleship and presented it to
the Air Force, who eventually bought into
the idea.
Fairly quickly, though, the US Government
decided there was no military purpose for
the Orion battleship, that they actually had
no need for any spacecraft so large and powerful,
and that it would put an unecessary strain
on nuclear relations with Russia.
The project was pretty much dead in the water
when nuclear space propulsion was eventually
banned by the Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963,
putting an official end to Orion's dreams.
1.
Aclubierre Drive
This one is ambitious.
Really ambitious.
We're talking warp drive.
The idea is that you can cheat Einstein's
Theory of relativity by creating a sort of
space time pressure dip in front of a spacecraft,
and a wave behind it, pushing the craft along
in a bubble in the middle at speeds which,
to us mortals, appears faster than light.
Mathematically, it works.
Mathematically.
It's also pretty efficient.
Initially, the amount of energy required to
form a bubble that could transport a ship
accross the milky way would have been greater
than in all the observable universe combined.
Which was a problem.
Later calculations and streamlining got that
down to less than three solar masses to move
a few small atoms.
More streamlining, and the journey could be
done with a Jupiter's worth of energy.
The latest calculations by Nasa's Professor
Harold White suggest that a Voyager -1 sized
spacecraft could suffice.
Interesting, but so far, purely theoretical,
right?
Well, not quite.
Professor White has, with support from Nasa,
been trying to warp time in the lab and prove
that it can be done.
They are using a device called the Michelson-Morley
interferometer, which measures space time.
If one of the legs of the sensor appear even
very slightly longer than the other, that's
proof that the system works, and that the
drive is possible.
Once you've got that, scaling up is *relatively*
easy.
Of course, even if we could build a ship,
trying to start, steer and most importantly
stop something that exists as a bubble within
known reality would be quite tricky.
But I'd give it a go.